ENGINEERING MATERIALS
      PENG 102
Here are some of the commonly used
 engineering materials




Wood          Stone/Granite          Copper




Steel         Aluminum           Plastics
Wooden components and structures
Stone/granite components and structures
Copper components and structures
Steel components and structures
Aluminum components and structures
Plastic components and structures
Materials are used together sometimes
    CLASSIFICATION OF
  ENGINEERING MATERIALS
Materials used in engineering applications
cover a range
– from simple daily uses like pencils and spoons
– to most complex and extreme cases like
  automotive vehicles, space vehicles and bio-
  medical uses.

Engineering materials used in applications
from simple daily life to extreme ones are
divided into following sub-classes:
                             Engineering materials




          A) Metals (and Alloys)                              B) Non-metals




                       A.2) Non-ferrous              B.1)Naturals    B.2) Artificials
A.1) Ferrous
                       metals
metals
                       (iron free)
(iron based)
                                 A) Metals and Alloys




A.1) Ferrous metals (iron based)              A.2) Non-ferrous metals (iron free)



       Cast iron: (%2<C<%4)                             Heavy metals
            •Gray CI                                        •Copper
            •White CI                                       •Chromium
            •Ductile CI                                     •Lead etc
            •Malleable CI
            •High alloy CI         Carbon               Light metals
                                   content                   •Titanium
                                   by mass                   •Beryllium etc
      Steel: (%C<2)
           •Plain Carbon steel                          Refractory (high temp)
           •Alloy steel                                 metals
                                                             •Tungusten
                                                             •Molybdenum etc


                                                        Precious metals
                                                             •Gold
                                                             •Silver etc
                    B) Non-metals




B.1)Naturals              B.2) Artificials
     •wood
     •granite etc
                                Polymers
                                    •Rubber
                                    •Thermoplastics
                                    •Thermosets etc


                                Ceramics
                                    •Glass
                                    •Cermets

                                 Composites
                                    •Metal matrix composites
                                    •Ceramic matrix composites
                                    •Polymer matrix composites
  Metals (ferrous metals and non-ferrous metals )
are used to be the main engineering materials preferred
  by mechanical engineers for centruies.

  The main reasons for using metals were
  – their abundancy (being plenty) in nature,
  – easy processing and also
  – their relatively more load carrying capacity.

  Artificial materials, however, took place in many
  applications because of their advantages like better
  insulation, better heat resistance, weight saving etc.

  Therefore, many different new materials were “found
  or derived” from other materials for certain
  advantages in different applications.
Ferrous metals
(cast iron and steel)
are still the most
widely used
materials in many
engineering
applications.

Steel, in particular,
has many versions
(alloys) with different
advantages for
different
applications.
Steel can serve in applications varying
– from simple machine construction to extreme load
  carrying applications and
– from simple springy (elastic) deflection applications
  to high temperature resistant or corrosion resistant
  applications.


Steels as one of the most important engineering
materials are divided into following sub-classes:
                         Steels (%C < 2)

                                             Carbon content
                                             by mass




   Plain Carbon steels                      Alloy Steels
      (Only carbon)                   (in addition to carbon)
       (%C < 1.5)
                                 in addition to carbon there is
with limited other alloying      modest amount of other alloying
         elements                           elements
        Plain Carbon steels
with limited alloying elements (%C
                < 1.5)

           Low carbon Steel (%C < 0.3)




       Medium carbon Steel (0.3<%C < 0.6)




        High carbon Steel (0.6<%C < 1.5)




          Free machining carbon Steel
               (with special alloys)
            Alloy Steels
with modest amount of alloying elements




                        Tool Steel
                 (used for tools and dies)


               Stainless (rust-free) Steel
                      (%Cr > 10.5)


                 High strength Steel
                   (weight saving)


                High strength low alloy
                     (HSLA) Steel



                Iron based super alloys
    A-METALS AND ALLOYS
Were classified as;
 1) ferrous (iron based) metals & alloys,
 i.e. Steels and cast irons

 2) non-ferrous metals & alloys; metals
 other than iron (Fe),
 i,e, Cu,Al,Zn,Pb etc and their alloys.
PRODUCTION OF FERROUS METALS
         AND ALLOYS
Iron is always the basic part of the
ferrous metals
Iron is found in nature as “iron ore”
which consist of iron
oxides,carbonates and sulphides
and gaunge.

Iron is obtained (produced) by
reduction of iron oxides with carbon
(i.e. coke) in the blast furnace.

Limestone is usually added into the
blast furnace charge to remove gang
i.e. SiO2 as calcium silicate slags.
                         Pig iron




Blast furnace for ıron
production
The product of blast furnace is
called “pig iron” which is
impure iron containing too
much C,Mn,P,S and Si.

Pig iron is either transformed
into
– “cast iron” containing > 2% C
or
– converted into “steels” in a
  secondary process, where C is
  reduced to <2%.
Pig iron




           Secondary process for steel production
                     STEELS
Steels are made
– by the removal of excess C and other
  impurities of pig iron by “oxidation”
followed
– by a “deoxidation” process and
– addition of C and alloying elements to
  the “required level”.

Oxidation is carried out by blowing
air or oxygen through molten pig
iron in either
– 1) Basic Oxygen Furnace
– 2) Siemens-Martin (open heart
  furnace)
– 3) Bessemer-Thomas furnace
– 4) Electric Furnace
                 STEELS
Scrap iron coming from
industry as recycled
product is usually converted
into steel in electric arc
furnaces

Steels usually contain up to
– 2%C,
– 1%Mn,
– 0.5%Si,
– 0.05%S and
– 0.05%P
  Plain
   ?    carbon steels and
   And
  Alloy
   ?    steels
are the two main groups of steels


  1-Plain carbon steels are the ones
 in which C is the significant alloying element
 and therefore they are are termed as “plain
 carbon steels”.
 They contain upto 1.5%C and also 1.65%Mn
 max, 0.6%Si max, 0.6%Cu max.
Classification of plain carbon steels
              Plain Carbon steels
   with limited alloying elements (%C < 1.5)

                  Low carbon Steel (%C < 0.3)




              Medium carbon Steel (0.3<%C < 0.6)




               High carbon Steel (0.6<%C < 1.5)




                  Free machining carbon Steel
                       (with special alloys)
A) Low carbon steels
1)Dead soft mild steels: contain <0.15%C and
are very soft ,easily fabricated by cold forming and
welding. used in construction where strength is not
very important.
 2) Mild steels: contain 0.15%-0.30%C also
called structural steels. used for structure and
machine applications, structural shapes i.e.
Channels, angles, I-beams, etc.
B) Medium carbon steels
   contain 0.3-0.6%C, combined properties are
strength, toughness and wear resistance, used for
crankshaft, axles, railway wheels and gears.
C) High carbon steels
   contain 0.6- 1.5%C, they have low ductility and
are used for high strength steels, wire production etc.
D) Free machining carbon steels
    these are specially developed for fast and
economic machining of parts. Machinability of the
plain carbon steels is improved by addition of
elements such as Pb,S,P and Te,Se,Bi.
2-ALLOY STEELS
(second group of the steels)
Other than carbon, they contain modest amount
 of other alloying elements.
They are heat treated to improve some desired
 mechanical properties.
They usually contain more than 1.65%Mn,
 0.60%Si and 0.60%Cu.
They have
  – Through hardenable grades
  – Carburizing grades and
  – Nitriding grades
EFFECTS OF ALLOYING ELEMENTS
Some of the alloying elements and their effect
 on the alloy steels are:
 C :increase hardness and tensile strength but
 decrease ductility and forging and welding
 properties
 Mn(1.65-2.1%) increases strength,
 hardenability and corrosion resistance
 Ni :increase strength, shock resistance,
 corrosion resistance and heat resistance, and
 lower the critical temperature for heat
 treatment.
Cr :increase hardness, hardenability, wear
resistance, corrosion resistance and heat
treatment, reduce resilience and promotes
formation of carbides
Mo :used in common with Mn and Cr to
increase hardenability, tensile and creep
strength.
 Vanadium :increase hardenability
Ti :increase yield point & weldability.
Tungsten (Wolfram ) :increase hardness and
tensile strength
Al(max 1%) promotes nitriding properties
Si(0.6-2.2%) raises the critical temperature for
heat treatment and increases resilience
Elemental Cu & Pb increase machinability.
Sulphides and nitrides increase hardness

P(max 0.03-0.05%) harmful
S(max 0.025-0.05%) harmful
P and S make steel brittle and prevent hot or
cold forming.
More the carbon, the harder the steel
Harder the steel, stronger the steel (higher
the strength)
Harder the steel, more difficult to bend or to
deform or to forge (hence less the ductility)
Harder the steel, the more the brittleness
Ductility and brittleness are opposite
properties (higher the ductility lower the
brittleness or vice versa)
    HIGH ALLOY STEELS
High alloy steels are the ones specially
produced with certain objectives by using
again certain elements as alloying
elements.
These steels are:
– Tool steels
– Stainless (rust free) steels
– High strength steels
– High strength low alloy steels and
– Iron based alloys
Tool steels: This type of steels are used
mainly in tools and dies to form or machine
other materials. These are clean,(i.e. no
inclusion), high alloy steels produced carefully
in elelctric furnaces. They usually contain
Cr,V,W,Mo or Co besides C,Mn and Si. They
are wear resistant, tough and have high hot
hardness..
Stainless (rust free) steels: they contain
minimum of 10.5%Cr. Addition of higher
amount of Cr and Ni further improve corrosion
resistance.They have high strength, hardness,
corrosion resistance and abrassion resistance.
High strength steels: these steels were developed for
specific high strength applications and used for weight
saving in constructions.
High strength low alloy (HSLA) steels: specially
developed to improve mechanical properties and
corrosion resistance while benefitting from weight
saving too.
Iron based super alloys: These are used primarly for
high temperature applications, and they are cheaper
than Co and Ni based super alloys.
Superalloys are used at temperatures from 540C to
1090C.
Iron based superalloys are used at lower end of this
range.
             CAST IRON
Cast iron is a four element alloy containing
iron, carbon (2 to 4%), silicon and manganese.

Some cast iron types may contain additional
alloying elements.

Cast iron contains large amount of carbon in
the form of Fe3C (cementite) and this
composition is not stable and decomposes
under certain conditions:
    Fe3C → 3Fe + C
According to this breakdown of cementite(Fe3C),
cast irons are classified as:
  – 1) Gray cast iron
  – 2) Ductile cast iron
  – 3) white cast iron
  – 4) malleable cast iron
  – 5) high alloy cast iron
             1) Gray cast iron
In the manufacture of gray cast iron cementite
separetes into graphite and austenite or ferrite by
controlling the alloy composition and cooling rates
Gray cast iron gives gray fracture surface hence called
gray CI.
They are widely used therefore they are important in
engineering.
.
Most gray cast irons contain C between 2.5-4%.
High compressive strength and excellent vibration
damping of gray CI makes it well suited fpr heavy
equipment and machine tool foundations.
  2) Ductile (nodular) cast iron
In production of ductile (or nodular) cast iron Mg
(magnesium) is used as an alloying element.
Mg causes formation of graphite in spherical or
nodular forms.
This operation of Mg addition to molten cast iron
precipitates out carbon in the form of small spheres
this, then improves some of the mechanical
properties gray cast iron.
Compared to gray CI, ductile CI will have improved
tensile strength, ductility and toughness
            3) White cast iron
This type of cast iron is produced by a process called
“chilling” (controlled cooling) which prevents graphite
carbon from precipitating out.
Either gray or ductile iron can be chilled to produce a
surface of white iron
In cast irons most of carbon is combined with iron as
iron carbide (cementite) a very hard material, and
grades of white iron depend on the amount of
cementite in the surrounding structure.
white iron, so called because of its very white
structure, can be formed only during solidification.
White CI’s are very hard and resistant to wear,
corrosion and oxidation.
        4) Malleable cast iron
This is a white cast iron that has been converted to a
malleable condition by a two stage heat treatment.
They are, as the name malleable implies, more
ductile and have relatively higher toughness values.
Compared to gray CI, they can be used in
applications which require higher tensile strengths,
ductilities and toughness.
Two basic types of malleable iron are ferritic and
pearlitic.
The third type of malleable iron -martensitic-is a
pearlitic or ferritic grade that has been heat treated
and transformed to a martensitic structure.
        5) High alloy cast iron
High alloy cast irons are ductile, gray or white
irons that contain over 3% alloy content.
These irons have properties that are signifiantly
different from the unalloyed irons and are
usually produced by specialized foundries.
Selecting the proper metal alloy for a casting is
difficult, primarily because the properties of the
finished part depend strongly upon the size
and the shape of the part.
This is very important to bear in mind when
deciding about the casting process.
   DESIGNATION OF STEELS
Similar to standards for various equipments (like
  bolts, tanks, gears etc) and machineries there
  are also various standardization bodies for
  steels.
Examples are:
  1) American AISI & ASTM
  2) German DIN
  3) Turkish TS, MKE
  4) British BS
  5) Euro-norm
  etc
  Designations of equipments in standarts
  usually require some kind of “criteria” and
steels as materials are usually specified or
  designated by the criteria of ;
  1) process of manufacture
  2) method of deoxidation
  3) chemical composition and
  4) mechanical properties
2. Designation by the method of
   deoxidation (removing excess oxygen)
   In steel making process the primary
   reaction involved is the combination of
   carbon and oxygen to form a gas to
   remove excess carbon.
   If the (excess amount of) oxygen
   available for this reaction is not removed
   prior to or during casting (by the addition
   of ferro-silicon or some other deoxidizer)
   the gaseous products continue to evolve
   during solidification.
   Improper control of the amount of gas
   evolved during solidification then cause
   non-uniformity in the microstructure of
   the steel and a spongy like structure will
   be created
Proper control of the amount of gas evolved during solidification
  determines the type of steel (3 types: Killed steel, semi-killed
  steel and rimmed steel).

  For "killed" steels, elements such as aluminum and silicon may
  be added to combine chemically with the oxygen, removing
  most of oxygen from the liquid steel.
  Killed steels are often specified for hot forging, carburizing, and
  other processes or applications where maximum uniformity is
  required. In sheet steel, aging is controlled by killing -- usually
  with aluminum. Steels intended for use in the as-cast condition
  are always killed. For this reason, steels for casting are always
  fully deoxidized.

  On the other hand, for "rimmed" steels, oxygen (in the form of
  carbon monoxide) evolves briskly throughout the solidification
  process. The outer skin of rimmed steels is practically free from
  carbon and is very ductile. For these reasons, rimmed steels
  are often specified for cold-forming applications. Rimmed steels
  are often available in grades with less than 0.25% C and 0.60%
  Mn.
Segregation -- a nonuniform variation in internal
characteristics and composition that results when
various alloying elements redistribute themselves
during solidification -- may be pronounced in rimmed
steels. For this reason, they are usually not specified
for hot forging or for applications requiring uniformity.

"Capped" and "semikilled" steels fall between the
rimmed and killed steels in behavior, properties, and
degree of oxidation and segregation.

Capped steels, for example, are suited for certain
cold-forming applications because they have a soft,
ductile, surface skin, which is thinner than rimmed-
steel skin. For other cold-forming applications, such
as cold extrusion, killed steels are more suitable
To brief or summarize the process of de-oxidation:
  Killed steels(R) are strongly deoxidized steels with no
  gas evolved during solidification these steels are
  characterized by a relationly high degree of uniformity
  of composition and properties. Recommended for
  forging ,piercing ,carburising and heat treating
  applications
  Semi killed steels (H) have relatively less uniform
  properties & composition across the size (section) of
  the ingot
  Rimmed steels(U) are only slightly deoxidized. They
  have marked differences in compositon across the
  section and from top to bottom of the ingot.
  Specially killed steels (RR)
Killed steels - completely deoxidized
steels, solidification of which does not
cause formation of carbon monoxide
(CO). Ingots and castings of killed steel
have homogeneous structure and no
gas porosity (blowholes).
Semi-killed steels – not completely
deoxidized steels containing some
amount of excess oxygen, which forms
carbon monoxide during last stages of
solidification.
Rimmed steels - partially deoxidized or
non-deoxidized low carbon steels
evolving sufficient amount of carbon
monoxide during solidification. Ingots of
rimmed steels are characterized by
good surface quality and considerable
quantity of blowholes.
 3)Designation by the chemical
         composition
Following steel groups are designated by
their chemical compositions:

– Plain carbon steels
– Alloy steels
    Tool steels
    Stainless steels
    HSLA steels and
    Super alloys
3)Designation by the chemical composition
a-Plain Carbon Steels: (by German DIN, TS )
 If Al (0.1%), Cu (0.25%), Mn (0.8%), Si (0.5%) and Ti
  (0.1%) are not exceeded, such steel is usually
  considered as unalloyed.

 The general designation for (unalloyed) plain carbon
 steels (which have only the carbon as alloying
 element) is
               CiXX (eg Ck20 or Cm40 etc)
where XX/100 is the percentage content of the carbon;

where i refers to the grade of the control of the some
 alloying elements and also to some mechanical
 properties (i=k, m, f, etc)
Table AISI & MKE steels
  1XXX carbon steel
  – 10XX plain carbon steels
  – 13XX manganese steels


  2XXX     nickel steels
  – 23XX    nickel steels with 3.5%Ni
  – 25XX    nickel steels with 5%Ni


  3XXX     nickel-chromium steels
  – 31XX    nickel-cr steels with 1.25%Ni 0.6%Cr
  – 32XX    nickel-cr steels with 1.75%Ni 1%Cr
  – 33XX    nickel-cr steels with 3.5%Nİ 1.5%Cr


  4XXX     molydenum steels
5XXX     chromium steels
– 51XX    low cr
– 52XX     medium cr


6XXX     chromium-vanadium

7XXX      tungsten steels

8XXX      chromium-nickel-molybdenum

9XXX      silican mangenese steels
            C) Tool steels
These steels are divided into four broad
groups.
 The designation of carbon tool steels (group1)
is the same as that of carbon steels.
i.e. C60W3 with 0.60% C content
     C110W2 with 1.10% C content etc
The only difference is that a quality symbol
follows the usual designation.
The quality symbol is "W" with W1, W2 and W3
denoting an increase in the quality in the order
(special, extra, best quality).
The symbol WS is used to denote a special
purpose tool steel.
High speed steels (Group 2 ) are designated as:
    S xx-yy-zz-uu
where S denotes high speed steel and
  xx is the % content of W
  yy is the % content of Mo
  zz is the % content of V
  uu is the % content of Co
no multiplication factor is used.


Ex.   S10-4-3-10   means 10% W, 4% Mo, 3% V and 10% Co
      S18-0-1      means 18% W, 0% Mo, 1% V and 0% Co
cold & hot work tool steels (Group 3&4 )
are designated according to the designation of
   alloy
DIN and ASİL çelik uses the same designation
i.e. 40NiMo10 8 means 0.40% C, 2.5%Ni and
   0.8%Mo

  – MKE uses the basic AISI designation for alloy steels
    and tools steels are classified into groups by the
    AISI. All these groups of tool steels and the
    corresponding designations are shown in table 1.3
          D) Stainless steels
 These are the large and widely used family of
chromium alloys known for their corrosion
resistance, obtained by a large chromium
content (min. 10.5%).

designation of these steels is based on the
basic SAE system (Ç51440, Ç3915 and
Ç51420, in the same order).
AISI designation of stainless steels is similar to the
AISI designation of alloy steels
ex: 30201, 30347, 51405, 51430 etc.

AISI groups wrought stainless steels into four major
categories based on metallurgical structure as
– (1) austenitic,
– (2) ferritic,
– (3) martensitic, and
– (4) precipitation hardening.


Cast stainless steels are considered as another group.
The DIN designation of the stainless steels is the
same as alloy steels.
X40 Cr 13, X12 CrNi 18 8, and X20 Cr 13 are the
DIN designations of the three types of stainless
steel produced by the MKE.

The DIN designation of cast stainless steels is
the same as that of the alloy steels only to be
preceeded by the letter G to indicate casting;
As you remember low alloy steels contain not more than
5% of alloy elements.
When the alloy contents exceed 5% (i.e. Stainless steel
with 10.5% or more Chromium), these multiplication
factors are not used (apart from that of carbon content).


                                       Instead, the letter
                                       “X” is put in front
                                       of the carbon
                                       content indicating
                                       that the
                                       number(s) at the
                                       end of
                                       designation
                                       specify the alloy
                                       content.
E- Steels for Strength and HSLA Steels:

The steels of very high strength are usually
proprietary, and are not consequently specifıed
by the standard designations,

However there are some special designation or
trade name such as;
 – SAE J410C
 – ASTM A 607
 – etc
f- super alloys :
are designated by the AISI 600 series with the specifications of
  high temperature & high strength.




   616 for example is equivalent to DIN designation of
   X20CrMoWV12 1
4. Designation by Mechanical Properties:
  The steels for general structural purposes are
  designated by the mechanical properties by the DİN,
  EURONORM, and KARABÜK D.Ç., Turkey.
  These steels are designated by
  – tensile strength (in kg/mm2) by the DIN and Karabük and
  – by either the tensile or the yield strength by the
    EURONORM.


    St xx-y is the DIN designation
  where xx is the tensile strength in kg/mm2 and
  y is the quality grade number denoting maximum P
  &S content
 DESIGNATION OF CAST IRONS (2-4%C)
Main four elements of cast irons are ;
iron, carbon, silicon and manganese
Gray cast iron is designated by its
tensile strength.
Some of the standarts & the
corresponding designations for the gray
CI are as follows:
   standart     designation
 TS 1111       DDL-XX kg/mm2          XX is the tensile
 DIN 1691      GL-XX kg/mm2           strength in kg/mm2
 ASTMA 45     class -XX lb/in2x1000
 BS 1452       grade-XX MPa
Ductile or nodular cast iron
 is designated by a three letter abbrevration
 followed by the tensile strength (xx in kg/mm2),
 such as
  – DDK-XX in TS 1111 and (e.g. DDK-35)
  – GGG-XX in DIN 1693 (e.g. GGG-45)
 ASTM designation (A339-55 and A396-58) of a
 typical alloy is given as xx-yy-zz,
 60-45-15 for example, means
  – a minimum tensile strength of 60psi
  – a minimum Sy of 45psi and
  – 15% elongation in 20 inches.
White iron
 There are no specifications for white iron unlike
 the gray iron
 the symbols DDB and GGW are used to
 designate the white iron in short form by the
 TS&DIN respectively

Malleable cast iron
is designated as
  – DDTS-xx (and DDTB-xx) in TS 1111 and
  – GTS-xx (and GTW-xx) DIN 1692
followed by the minimum tensile strength (xx in
   kg/mm2 ) of the material.
Examples are: DDTS-35 & GTS-40
  The ASTM designation of malleable CI is
  based on 5digit system xxxyy
where xxx multiplied by 100 is the Sy value
  in psi and yy is the % elongation over 2in
  gauge length
e.g. 32510 means Sy=32500psi and 10% elongation
     50005 means Sy=50000psi and 5% elongation
      NON-FERROUS METALS
By the definition all metalic materials that do not
  have iron (Fe) as their major ingredent are
  called non-ferrous metals.
The arbitrary classifications or grouping of the
  non-ferrous metals are:
1)Light metals (Al,Mg,Ti,Be)
2)Heavy metals (Cu,Zn,Pb,Sn ….)
3)Precious metals (Au,silver,platinum)
4)Refractory metals (tungsten,Ni,Mo,Cr)
        LIGHT METALS
The border of light and heavy metals is around
5000kg/m3.
Metals with densities below 5000kg/m3 are called
the light metals and others above 5000kg/m3 are
called the heavy metals
The lightest metal is the Lithium with the density
of 530kg/m3 and the heaviest metal is the
osmium with density of 22500kg/m3 (density of
water is ………kg/m3)
The steel(iron) whereas has a density of
7800kg/m3 only
Some examples for light metals are Al, Be, Mg, Ti
Aluminum (2700kg/m3)currently is probably the
most important of the nonferrous metals.
Aluminum and its alloys number hundreds, and are
available in all common commercial forms.
Aluminum is outstanding for its physical properties
such as light weight, high thermal and electrical
conductivity, and corrosion resistance.
it is suitable for casting, all machining and forming
operations.
Aluminum materials can be classified into three major
groups:
1. Pure aluminum and aluminum alloys.
2. Heat-treatable and nonheat-treatable alloys.
3. Wrought (forged) or cast alloys.
Beryllium is a recently emergent material which has
  several unique properties:
  low density (one third lighter than aluminum);
  high modulus/density ratio (six times greater than
  ultrahigh-strength steels);
  high melting point;
  dimensional stability;
  excellent thermal conductivity and transparency to
  X rays.
On the other hand, it has serious deficiencies:
  it is expensive;
  its use is severely limited by its poor ductiiity;
  all compounds of beryllium are dangerously toxic.
  Beryilium is not especially receptive to alloying
Magnesium is the lightest engineering material
  available.
The combination of low density and good mechanical
  strength of magnesium alloys has made it one of the
  most specifıed materials in aircraft, space, portable
  power tools, luggage and similar applications,
  competing with the aluminum alloys.
Alloys of magnesium are the easiest of all engineering
  metals to machine.
They are amenable to die casting, and they are easily
  welded.
Furthermore, the magnesium parts can be joined by
  rivetting and adhesive bonding
Titanium is used in corrosive environments or in
applications that take advantage of its
– light weight,
– high strength, and
– nonmagnetic properties
Titanium has good high temperature strength
compared with the other light metals.
Titanium, like steel, is allotropic; i.e., it can exist
in two different crystallographic forms. They are
called the alpha phase and the beta phase.
It is also widely used in medical sector due to its
superior properties
          2) HEAVY METALS
Copper is probably the first engineering metal to
   be used;
because, unlike other metals, it can occur in
   nature in the metallic form as well as an ore.
It has very good heat and electric conductivity
   and resist to corrosion when alloyed with other
   metals.
Copper alloys can be grouped into two major
   catagories as
  – (1) cast alloys and
  – (2) wrought (formed by forging) alloys.
Cast copper alloys are used in the form in
which they are originally moulded. This
naturally restricts the subsequent operations.
The wrought copper alloys consist of the
following general categories.
a. Coppers— Contain minimum 99.3% Cu.
b. High-Copper Alloys- Contain 96-99.3% Cu.
c. Brasses— Contain zinc as the principal
alloying element. (5-40% Zn)
d. Bronze— Originally, copper-tin alloys, but
contain a variety of other elements,at present,
in addition to tin, or other than tin.
e. Copper nickels (Cupro nickels)— Contain
nickel as the main alloying element.
f. Nickel silvers— Copper-nickel-zinc alloys.
They actually do not contain silver.
Zinc is an inexpensive material with moderate
strength.
Chemically zinc is similar to magnesium.
Mechanically,however ,zinc is more ductile but
not as strong.
Although its metal & alloy forms are important
zinc is most commonly used to extend the life of
other materials such as steel (galvanizing),
rubber and plastic (as an aging inhibitor), and
wood (İn paint coatings).
Lead is a versatile material which has
applications that derive from its special
properties of high atomic weight and
density, softness, ductility, low strength,
low melting point, corrosion resistance,
and ability to lubricate.
Toxicity of its compounds is one of the
chief disadvantages.
In general, lead does not form useful alloys
  except with other metals with low melting
  points.
In the free machining leaded steel alloys the
  lead is not an alloy ingredient but an inclusion.
Lead is alloyed with tin and antimony to form a
  series of useful alloys, which are mainly
  employed for their low melting points.
Lead-base "babbitt" bearing alloys contain 75-
  90% lead, plus antimony and tin.
Tin is most commonly used as a coating for
  other metals - such as the tin cans, copper
  cooking utensils, and so on.
  Other applications include die-casting alloys,
  pewter chemicals, bronze, bearing alloys, and
  solder.
  Tin alloys are cast, rolled, drawn,and may be
  extruded or atomized.
  As with many metals, pure tin is too weak to
  be used alone for most mechanical
  applications.
  Tin is often alloyed with elements such as
  copper,antimony, lead, aluminum and zinc to
  improve mechanical or physical properties.
         REFRACTORY METALS
Refractory metals have melting points above
1900°C.
These metals are characterized by high-
temperature strength and corrosion resistance.
Although nickel has a lower melting point
(1455°C), because of its use in applications
usually requiring specific corrosion resistance or
strength at high temperatures, it is also
categorized in this group.
it must, however, be pointed out that the
prominent, actual refractory metals are tungsten,
molybdenum, tantalum and columbium.
In addition to these, chromium and niobium are
receiving major considerations as high
temperature materials.
Nickel is one of the most important of engineering
  materials.
Nickel and its alloys are used in a variety of applications
  usually requiring specific corrosion resistance or
  strength at high temperatures.
Nickel alloys have a wide range of desirable properties
  such as ultra-high strength, high proportional limit, and
  high modulus of elasticity.
Commercially pure nickel has good electrical, magnetic,
  and magnetostrictive properties.
Nickel alloys are strong, tough and ductile at cryogenic
  temperatures.
On the other hand, several nickel-based superalloys are
  specified for high-strength applications at temperatures
  up to 1100°C.
High-carbon nickel-base casting alloys are used regularly
  at moderate stresses above 1200°C.
Tungsten and molybdenum have had industrial
 uses for many decades, Thomas Edison's
 experimentation with tungsten during the
 invention of the incandescent lamp being the
 most important application.
Tungsten and molybdenum are the chief carbide-
 formers in high-speed steels, molybdenum
 tending to replace tungsten in this application
 because of its lower weight.
Though both metals have very desirable
 mechanical properties at high temperatures,
 they both have the serious defects of great
 brittleness at room temperature and
 pronounced oxidation at relatively low
 temperatures.
Tungsten is the only refractory metal that has
 excellent erosion resistance, good electrical
 and thermal couductivity, low coefficient of
 expansion, and high strength-at elevated
 temperatures.
Molybdenum is one of the few metals that have
 some degree of resistance to hydrofluoric acid.
 Properties of molybdenum are similar to those
 of tungsten, however, molybdenum is more
 ductile, easier to fabricate, and cheaper.
Columbium and Tantalum are distinguished by
 excellent ductilty, even at low temperature.
 Both metals occur together in ores and they
 must be separated for nuclear use, since
 tantalum has a high neutron absorption and that
 of columbium is low
 Columbium and tantaium can be fabricated by
 most conventional procedures,
 These metals are usually considered together
 because most of their working operations are
 identical.
 Tantalum and columbium are usually worked at
 room temperature.
                     PRECIOUS METALS
The family of metals called precious metals can be divided
   into three subgroups:

   (1) gold and gold alloys;
   (2) silver and silver alloys; and
   (3) "platinum group" metals.


Most precious metals are available as sheet, tape, foil,
    wire, tubing, gauze, discs, electrodes, cathodes,
    crucibles, catalysts, and salts and solutions for plating
    and coating.
The precious metals are nearly completely corrosion
    resistant;
platinum metals withstand service up to 1760°C without
    any evidence of erosion and corrosion
                    Non-metals

B.1)Naturals             B.2) Artificials
     •wood
     •granite etc
                               Polymers
                                   •Rubber
                                   •Thermoplastics
                                   •Thermosets etc


                               Ceramics
                                   •Glass
                                   •Cermets

                                Composites
                                   •Metal matrix composites
                                   •Ceramic matrix composites
                                   •Polymer matrix composites
               Polymers
Plastics: A plastic is a synthetic material of
high molecular weight, composed of repeating
organic chemical units.
Plastics can be moulded or formed into useful
shapes by various proceses usually involving
heat and/or pressure.
Plastics are not found in nature.They are made
synthetically from basic chemical raw materials
called “monomers”.
Plastic polymers are always composed of atoms
  of carbon in combination with other elements.
At present, only eight elements are utilized to
  create thousands of different plastics.
These eight elements are carbon, hydrogen,
  nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, silicon, sulfur, and
  chlorine.

 Plastics are classified into two main groups:
 1) thermo plastics and
 2) thermo setting plastics
Thermoplastics can be re-shaped upon being heated, more
significantly, can be reground or remolded.
Many uses have been found for the various types of
thermoplastic materials,and processes have been under
development to produce economical finished and semi-
finished parts.
Thermoplastics can be moulded, rolled into sheets,used for
strip coatings,and extruded into shapes.
The material can be reused, therefore, there is little waste
Thermoplastic materials can be obtained in any shape of any
desired colour or mixture of colours as well as in any desired
degree of transparency,including crystal clear and opaque.
This is a definite advantage thus eliminating painting or other
finishing operations required to achieve the desired sales
appearance.
Some examples of thermoplastics are given in Table 1.11.
Thermo setting plastics:
  The term thermoset means a plastic which sets, or completes
  the polymerızation under heat and effect of ather agents.
  The actual distinguishing factor between the two classes
  (thermo plastic and thermosets) is whether the polymer chains
  remain linear and separate after moulding or whether they
  undergo three-dimensional chain combination cross-linking.
  Linear plastics (thermo plastic) can be considered to be
  unchanged during moulding and can be remolded over and
  over.
  The chains of crosslinked plastics (thermosets )are, however,
  joined irreversibly during moulding which does not permit
  remoulding.
  Crosslinking can be initiated by heat, chemical agents (curing
  agents), irradiation, or a combination of these.
  thermo sets have improved resistance to heat (thus can not be
  remolded), chemical attack, stress cracking,and creep in
  comparison with the same plastic in the thermo plastic form.
  In addition thermosets have better dimensional stability and
  electrical properties than do the thermoplastics.
  Most thermosets are used principally in filled and/or
  reinforced form for improved properties or for
  economy.
  they are more difficult to process and are more brittle
  than the thermoplastics.

some examples of the thermo sets are;
  – alkyd,
  – aminos(melamine),
  – epoxy ,
  – polyester,
  – polyurethan,
  – Silicone
  – etc
               ADDITIVES
Few plastics are used on their own.
Nearly all contain a number of additives
– to improve the properties,
– to facilitate processing or
– to reduce costs.
the following are the important additives
employed by the plastics industry:
colourants, fillers, catalysts, plasticizers,
stabilizers, fire reterdants, lubricants.
Fiber-reinforced plastics (FRP) have proven to be the
fastest growing engineering material.
They offer properties and performance benefits
considerably beyond those available in the
unreinforced resins.
Though the cost of the fiber-reinforced plastics is
higher, it is usually more than offset by the gain in
performance.
These materials are extremely versatile composites
with relatively high strength to weight ratios and
excellent corrosion resistance.
in addition, they can be formed economically into
virtually any shape and size; from tiny electronic
components to large cruising boat hulls.
The FRP's are composed of three major components:
  (1) matrix; (2) fiber, and (3) bonding agent

 Some examples of FRP’s with different fiber and
 matrixes are;
  – 1)glass-reinforced thermoplastics
  – 2)carbon reinforced thermoplastics
  – 3)Reinforced thermosetting plastics
  – 4)laminated plastics
  – 5)sandwich composites
 Each of these types aims the improvements in
 mechanical & chemical properties as well as in the
 final cost.
        STRUCTURAL FOAM
While several different methods are used to produce
structural-foam parts, all systems disperse a gas into
the polymer melt during processing.
This is done
– either by adding a chemical blowing agent to the compound
– or by inducing a gas directly into the melt.
The gas creates the cellular core structure in the part
during the moulding process making the material more
efficient in terms of strength to weight ratio compared
to conventional mouldings
             ELASTOMERS
These are commonly refered to as "rubbers”

The ASTM defines an elastomer as
"a polymeric material which at room
temperature can be stretched to at least twice
its original length and upon immediate release
of the stress will return quickly to approximately
its original length".
The raw polymer of an elastomer is generally
composed of monomers which are linked end-
to-end to form long chains, free to bend or
rotate at most of the links.
These tangled chains can slide past each other
except where they are attacked by crosslinks
which tie the molecular chains together and
limit the amount of stretch.
Crosslinking occurs during vulcanisation of the
moulded part and is effected by catalysts in
conjunction with heat and pressure (as in the
case of thermo-sets).
Some examples of elastomers are:
  – Natural rubber
  – Butadiene
  – Neoprene
  – Nitric butadiene
  – Polyacrylics
  – Chlorinated polyethylene
  – Ethylene propylene
  – Polyurathenes
 Properties and applications for these
 elastomers are given in detail in the textbook.
                 CERAMICS
Generally, ceramics are hard and brittle and cannot
endure high tensile loads or sudden impact.
On the other hand, ceramics have high compressive
strengths and resistance to high temperature.
Ceramics are made of metal oxides, metal carbides,
and silicates, though some borides, hydrides, sulfides,
and nitrides are also used in industry.
Ceramics can be made into bricks, turbine blades,
grinding wheels, carbide bits to machine materials.
These are only few examples of the ceramic products.
Ceramics are becoming increasingly important as
materials used in manufacturing.
They have had extensive use in the electrical industry
due to high electrical resistance.
An "engineering ceramic" is usually selected to meet any (or
  combination) of the following design requirements:
   – high temperature resistance,
   – compressive loads resistance,
   – severe abrasion resistance,
   – Corrosion resistance,
or the need for
   – extreme rigidity,
   – creep resistance,
   – high-temperature corrosion resistance, and
   – special physical properties.


In fact, the behaviour and properties of a ceramic also depend on
   how the part is made and how the ceramic particles are bonded
   together
Most ceramic parts are made by first compressing the particles
   into preform and then by further processing chemically and
   mechanically to produce the final ceramic part.
REFRACTORY HARD METALS (RHM)
These are a composite of ceramic and metal
materials
they are sometimes called “cermets” or
“cemented carbides”
they combine some of the high refractoriness of
ceramics and the toughness and thermal-shock
resistance of metals
parts from cermet material are produced by
pressing powders (of cermets) into moulds at
medium and high presses, they are then
sintered in controlled atmosphere furnaces at
about 1650 C to bind them together
There are four different system of RHM’s used for
  structural applications (not for metal cutting).
   – Tungsten carbide with 3% to 10% matrix of cobalt
     is the most common structural cermet and often
     specified for combined wear and impact resistance
   – Combination of tungten carbide and tantalum
     carbide in a matrix of nickel, cobalt, or chromium
     provides a formulation especially suited for a
     combination of corrosion and wear resistance
     (nozzles, orifice plates and valve components are
     some examles)
   – Tungsten titanium carbides (WTiC2) in cobalt is
     used primarily for metal forming dies and similar
     applications.
   – Titantium carbide has a molybdenum or nickel
     matrix and is formulated for high-temperature
     service (around 1100C)
                  CARBON
Carbon, a nonmetallic element, exists in three
generic forms:
    diamond,
    graphite and
    black, or amorphous carbon.
All three forms are useful engineering materials.

Diamond is used for engineering purposes
primarily, because it is the hardest naturally
occuring material, although synthetic boron
nitride, or "borazon" has similar mechanical
properties and will scratch diamond
Graphite (second form of carbon) is
 – readily machinable,
 – resist heat and thermal shock,
 – a good heat conductor, and
 – is chemically inert to almost all corrosives except
   strong oxidizing agents.
Graphite has a unique property that its strength
increases with temperature and therefore it is often
used in high temp- structural applications such as
missile-nozzle inserts, heat shields, fuel chamber
and furnace liners etc
Pyrolytic grades of graphites have the highest
strength of any material above 2750C
Black carbon, (third form of carbon) on the other
hand, is often specified for low-friction applications
  COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Composite is a combination of two or more
materials that has the properties that the
components individually do not have by
themselves
composites bring the superior properties of
components together to serve better in
applications like:
– high strength
– high temperature,
– good lubricity
– good chemical resistance ,
– low density,
– ease of processing
– etc.
 But all of these good (or superior) properties
 may not come together always
 generally metals, plastics or ceramics are
 brougth together in different proportions by
 different methods to produce composite
 materials with better properties
 Composites usually consist of a matrix material
 with the reinforcing elements of
  – Filaments
  – Fibres
  – Particulate materials
to give enhanced mechanical properties to the
  final product
Matrix gives the composite its bulk form and
structural constituents determine the character
of the composite’s internal structure.
the structural constituents can be categorized
as;
Fibres       → fibre composites
Particles     → particulate composites
Laminates → laminar/laminated composites
Flakes       → flake composite
Fillers      → filled composite
            Laminated            Sandwıch




Honeycomb               Corrugated           Waffle


   Examples of laminar and sandwich composites
If you remember the FRP’s were also called as
   composites because FRP's are composed of three
   major components: (1) matrix; (2) fiber, and (3)
   bonding agent

  Some examples of FRP’s with different fiber and
  matrixes were;
   – 1)glass-reinforced thermoplastics
   – 2)carbon reinforced thermoplastics
   – 3)Reinforced thermosetting plastics
   – 4)laminated plastics
   – 5)sandwich composites
  Each of these types aims the improvements in
  mechanical & chemical properties as well as in the
  final cost.
QUIZ- 1. What are the objectives of the
 course Engineering Materials ?

 ……………………..
 …………………….
 ………………………
QUIZ- 2. Make a classification of
 engineering materials as much as you
 learnt in this course.

  A)…………………..            B)………………….




 …………..     ……………..      …………..       ……………..

   …            …         …             …
   …            …         …             …
   …            …         …             …
